Scope: Safeguard Against Bad Agent Binaries

RSDK-14092 (Submit LGTM here)
Needs tech spec: no

Author: Benji Rewis
Summary
The viam-agent service on-device (Linux systemd service, Windows service) should have a “detached” mode where only viam-server runs. We should fallback to this “detached” version of the service in the event of installing a bad viam-agent binary.
Definitions
“Bad viam-agent binary”
a viam-agent binary that is either unrunnable (missing symbols, compiled incorrectly, etc.) or crashes early enough in its startup that the associated viam-server process is never up for enough to time for a user/dev to deploy a fix through a Viam module or access the device via the Viam shell to fix the issue
Spec driven AI-Assisted Prototype
agent branch with proposed “detached” mode for Linux
Motivation
Devices that run a version of viam-agent with a fatal startup issue are basically irrecoverable. A viam-agent binary with a fatal startup issue can neither update itself nor start viam-server. Without some other non-Viam means of accessing the affected device, Viam software will never reach app.viam.com` or be reachable through SDKs. See Postmortem: Agent File Permissions Fatal Startup for a case where this happened in production in February. In that case, the customer chose to physically ship entirely new devices.
Goals
Allow viam-server to run even when the viam-agent binary is “bad”
A live viam-server will allow a dev/user to use the Viam shell to connect to the machine or deploy an arbitrary script via a module. Whatever is causing the viam-agent binary to be “bad” could be fixed via those methods. Though it is a bit hacky, this access could be the difference between a fleet of unreachable machines and an issue a customer never notices
Notify the NetCode team when a “bad” viam-agent binary is found
The NetCode team will have likely to manually intervene to fix the issue
Non-Goals
Handle situations where both viam-agent and viam-server installed binaries are “bad”
We can assume we are SoL here. Trying to solve for these cases will either add too much complexity or naively introduce a third monitoring process that could be equally “bad”
Loudly notify users when a “bad” viam-agent binary has been installed
When a “bad” viam-agent binary is installed, how to fix the issue will not be clear. We do not want to loudly notify users something is wrong (big banner in the app UI, e.g.), as there likely will not be an obvious action for them to take. Instead, we should just notify the NetCode team
Agent changes
Linux
Define a new viam-server-detached systemd service that can run the currently installed viam-server binary as the main systemd service process
After systemd fails to start viam-agent a number of times, run a viam-server-detached service instead
Windows
Define a new viam-server-detached Windows service that can run the currently installed viam-server binary as the main service process
After the Windows service manager fails to start viam-agent a number of times, run a viam-server-detached service instead
RDK changes
Add a -detached flag to the viam-server binary
When run with the -detached flag, viam-server outputs an error log at startup: “Bad viam-agent binary installed; running in detached mode”
App changes
Add a metric that counts the number of “Bad viam-agent binary installed; running in detached mode” logs (with a label for part ID) received. Add a NetCode alert for when that metric ever exceeds 0

Rejected Alternatives
Rollback agent to a previous version or a known, documented “safe” version when a bad agent binary is downloaded
In cases like the one described in Postmortem: Agent File Permissions Fatal Startup, all previous versions of agent would have been caught in a bootloop. Rolling back to a previous version may not solve anything. Similarly, a “safe” version kept in GCS under packages.viam.com/viam-agent/safe-version (e.g.) may not be exempt from whatever issue is causing the installed version of viam-agent to start
It is simpler to just “give up” and run viam-server than try to fix the situation with rollback code that will likely introduce more complexity and may not solve some of the cases we care about the most
Make viam-server its own Linux systemd service or Windows service
Making viam-server its own service would isolate it from the viam-agent service, but it introduces non-trivial refactors to agent code and breaks the hierarchy of systemd managing viam-agent managing viam-server. With systemd managing both services, it becomes unclear whose "responsibility" it is to restart a crashed viam-server, for example
Risks
We may erroneously enter “detached” mode
There is a risk that we will write or later introduce a bug that reports a false positive for “bad agent binary; enter detached mode.” Any device affected by that bug would require manual intervention
